So let's see if this works better than Mars
Observer. Okay, this is Ron Sharn interviewing
Dale Cruikshank, older Colorado, October 19,
1993.
Dale, for the record, would you please give your
full name? Yes, I am Dale Paul Cruikshank. And when
and where were you born? I was born in Des Moines,
Iowa, 1939, August 10th. When did you get
interested in astronomy? I got interested in
astronomy when I was about 12 or 13 years old. The
first astronomical event of my life was the total
eclipse of the sun of June 30, 1954, at which time I
was 13 years old, I think. And my mother took me and a
school friend to northern Michigan to see the
totality phase. And it was a success. And from then
on, it was clear that I had to be an astronomer.
Where did you go to undergraduate school? I was an
undergraduate physics major at Iowa State
University in Ames. I graduated from there in 1961
and went from there then to the University of
Arizona where I was a graduate student I got a
master's degree in planetary geology in 1966, I
believe it was, and finished a PhD in 1968, also in
the geology department with an emphasis on
planetary geology. So what were you doing at
Yerkes in the summer of 1959? When I was midway
through my freshman year at Iowa State, I already
started thinking about graduate school. and
began to write to various schools that had
astronomy programs. And one of those schools, of
course, was the University of Chicago. And I got a
very nice letter back answering the questions I
had asked and telling me about a summer program
that was held at Yerkes Observatory for
undergraduates and inviting me to apply for that.
I did apply and was told that the program was really
for more advanced undergraduates than someone
who was just finishing her freshman year. but that
if I could provide a suitable letter of
recommendation, they would consider my
application. So this was correspondence with Joe
Chamberlain, who at the time was the chairman of
the student admission program, I think. So I
managed to get a letter of recommendation from
Philip Riggs, who was the astronomer at the Drake
University and operated the Drake Municipal
Observatory, and with whom I'd become friends
because I lived in Des Moines. And so Riggs sent a
letter of recommendation that was accepted by
Chamberlain and the committee, and I was offered
the summer job. So I showed up at Yerkes in the early
summer of 1958.
What did you do there? The first summer, I worked in
the darkroom on Kuiper's Lunar Atlas project, at
which time he was assembling the photographs from
ground-based telescopes around the world, the
best lunar photographs to assemble into the lunar
atlas that was supported by the U.S. Air Force. And
I remember I'd had a lot of experience with
darkroom work just as an amateur photographer, so
it was pretty easy to fit into that role, and I
enjoyed it a lot. I remember the thrill on one
afternoon when Kuiper came around to the darkroom
shortly after I had arrived and introduced
himself and saw what I was doing and came in and was
helping me produce a couple of prints from some of
these lunar negatives. And there we stood side by
side with our hands in the developer tank rubbing
on one of these prints to try to increase the
development in a place that needed a little bit of
extra help. And it was a real thrill because I had
known Kuiper's name, of course, from reading the
textbooks and so on. And there we were in the
darkroom rubbing prints together. We'll get back
to him in a while, but now you got your PhD in what
year? 1968. Okay, where did you go from there? I
went pretty much directly to Moscow from there. I
had been interested in Russia, Russian language,
Russian culture, the Russian science program
since undergraduate days when I started to study
the language. And Kuiper was interested in it too.
He had I, of course, spent my graduate years with
him there in Tucson. And he had developed contacts
with the Soviet Union in terms of its lunar and
planetary exploration program. And I asked him to
help me try to get one of the National Academy of
Sciences exchange appointments to the Soviet
Union. The exchange program was fairly quiet but
reasonably active at the time. And he helped, and I
got one of the appointments. Um, shortly after I
got my degree, uh, within a couple of months, I took
off for Moscow, spent a better part of a year there
and returned to Tucson in the summer of 1969. What
did you do aside from hearing me over the radio in
the caucuses one time? Yes. What did you do at, in
Moscow? Um, the reason that it made sense to go
there in the first place is that Vasily Moroz, uh,
was a planetary astronomer. working in the near
infrared with equipment very comparable in
quality to what Kuiper had in Tucson and the
equipment that I had used under Kuiper's
direction in Tucson. So it made sense to go there
and find out what Moroz was doing to work with him on
planetary problems and so on. He received me in
Moscow, and we did, in fact, work together. We
observed together in the Crimea, wrote a couple of
papers, And it was, in general, quite an
adventure. So it was an opportunity to spend 10 or
11 months with the Russian counterpart of
Kuiper's program to assess what they were doing,
to actually make a few interesting observations,
write a couple of papers. Where'd you go from
there? I went back to Tucson in the summer of 69. and
spent almost, well, essentially a year there as
Kuiper's associate. It was clear, however, that I
would always be cast in the role of a former
student, and Kuiper and I had a couple of tussles
over scientific issues during that year's time. I
was talking at the same time with the people in
Hawaii, namely Bob Murphy, who is now at NASA
headquarters, David Morrison, and with Bill
Sinton and John Jeffries at the University of
Hawaii about a possible position there. And they
offered one. I originally turned it down. And then
when things got tight with Kuiper again, it looked
like it'd be appropriate to accept it. I did. And
then in either late June or early July, I took off
for Hawaii and stayed there for the better part of
18 years. OK. What did you do at Hawaii? Hawaii was,
in the summer of 1970, putting the finishing
touches on the 2.2-meter telescope that the NASA
Planetary Program had funded. NASA built the
telescope roughly at a cost of $3 million. The
state of Hawaii provided the building and
infrastructure roughly for a cost of $2 million.
This was one, of course, of the several NASA
telescopes that were built during that era. And
they were trying to build a... a program of
ground-based astronomy, nighttime
ground-based astronomy, because they already
had a solar program. And we're building staff.
We're finishing up this telescope and so on. So it
was an opportunity to get in on the ground floor of
the exploitation and development of Mauna Kea as a
ground-based observing site, which turned out,
of course, later to be world-class quality. So I
went to Hawaii on a research position. with no
teaching obligations, and it was one of those very
rare opportunities to move into an academic
setting with all of the best of the opportunities
and very little of the liabilities. What did you
work on? I began working immediately on planetary
problems. The 2.2-meter telescope had a large
Coudet spectrograph, which was available
essentially as the telescope was commissioned.
And I began doing high dispersion coude
spectroscopy, photographic spectroscopy. And I
remember the first problem I worked on was ammonia
on Saturn. There was not, at that time, a positive
detection of ammonia on Saturn, although it was
obvious on Jupiter. Although it was in some
textbooks, but it was wrong. That's right, yes. So
I used,
I think not the highest, but next highest
dispersion spectrograph with about two
angstroms per millimeter. photographic looking
for the 6450 band of ammonia on Saturn, and I
couldn't find it with what I thought was a rather
high sensitivity limit. So I published an
abstract and presented that at a DPS meeting, I
think in 1971. I believe, I'm not certain, but I
believe that my abstract was the first published
scientific result from the 88-inch or 2.2-meter
telescope. I've never made a point of that to my
Hawaii colleagues, but for what it's worth, I
think that is, in fact, true. Where did you go after
Hawaii? Well, of course, Hawaii was an experience
that ran nearly 18 years, and so I'd really
developed almost all of my professional career
during that period. I left Hawaii... After 17 and a
half years. In what year? I believe late 87 and
began a position at NASA Ames Research Center in
California in January of 88. Why the switch? I made
the switch primarily because my family and I were
tired of living in Hawaii. And it was, in fact, that
personal decision that motivated us to consider
leaving the islands. Hawaii had tremendous
professional opportunities and advantages. And
I was not in the slightest dissatisfied with those
professional aspects of the situation. The
Institute for Astronomy during that 17 and a half
years certainly did change. But I was very much a
part of it. I was made to feel extremely welcome and
valued there. Yet, based on my family's personal
desire to return to mainland United States, we
decided to leave Hawaii. And the opportunity for a
position at NASA Ames arose largely through the
help of Michael Werner, and James Pollock at NASA
Ames, both of whom wanted me there. And so they made
an opportunity, and we took it. Are you still
there? I'm still at NASA Ames. It's coming up on six
years. What are you doing, or what have you done?
I'm continuing the very kind of thing I was doing in
Hawaii, specifically spectroscopy in the
infrared and near-infrared of planetary
objects. And during the time since I started that
business in the early 60s, which has now been
almost exactly 30 years. Enormous advances have
been made in the technology of infrared
observations at all wavelengths and it's a real
pleasure and a thrill to still ride on the crest of
that wave as we continue to open up new levels of
sensitivity and brightness and difficulty in
looking at the infrared spectral signatures of
small, distant, faint, cold solar system bodies.
Isn't it nice not to have to ammoniate plates
anymore? It's nice not to have to ammoniate
plates, and I did a fair amount of that, too. I still
got scars from some of that, but that's another
story. You're the obvious person to ask this.
While this project that I'm doing is subtitled
NASA and the Rebirth of Planetary Astronomy, I do
want to mention some other stuff now. The former
Soviet Union had a huge program in science and
everything, and a huge space program and so forth.
But as Gerard de Bacallure said, they'd take a
telescope this small, holding his fingers a
centimeter apart, and get an image this small,
holding his fingers a millimeter apart, take an
equation this long, holding his hands a yard
apart, And get a wrong result. Now, it seems to me
they had the highest ratio of effort to results
that I've ever heard of in any field of science.
What's your view about that? Is that true? And if
so, why? Well, let me try to answer that with a
specific focus on the near infrared, which is my
primary area of expertise. As I indicated before,
I went to Moscow in the first place because Moroz
had a detector and a spectrometer comparable to
what Kuiper had. And this involved a lead sulfide
single element detector that was attached to a
spectrometer working in the lead sulfide region,
that is, lead sulfide cooled with dry ice or
nitrogen and operating out to about two and a half
or three microns. Now, I'm told that the way the
Russians got that lead sulfide detector is that in
earlier years when the Russians were friends with
the Chinese, that the Chinese had come upon an
American rocket with a heat-seeking guidance
system. And that heat-seeking, this was probably
aftermath of the Korean conflict, maybe during
the Korean conflict. But anyway, the Chinese gave
this rocket sensing device to the Russians, their
friends. The Russians took it apart, discovered
that it was a lead sulfide detector, and proceeded
to analyze it in such a way that they could make one
themselves. An entire institute of probably
greater than 100 people was assigned this task.
And they, in fact, did make lead sulfide detectors
of comparable quality. A couple of these found
their way into the hands of scientists, in
particular. And he was able to exploit it for
scientific use. As I'm told this story, this
particular science institute was this was
essentially their only task, was to deal with this
one detector system. And after several years of
working, continuing on it, they got so entrenched
and ingrown and inbred that they even lost the
technique themselves. And after they had had this
initial success, they couldn't do it anymore. Yet
the Institute and all the personnel stayed intact
and proceeded down their merry way because
apparently nobody called them off. and told them
to go do something else. So that was apparently the
apex, the culmination of Russian near-infrared
detector development. And to my understanding,
it never got any better. And they were never able,
after that initial success, to keep up with
Western achievements, Western developments in
detector development. Let's go back to GPK now. He
was on the Project Alsos mission, which everyone
always confuses with Operation Paperclip, but
Alsos went in with the combat troops sometimes
ahead of them. And that's where I understand that
GPK picked up the infrared technology that he
used. Well, I think that's not entirely correct.
It's related. Kuiper was working on Alsos to
evaluate German technological achievements and
developments and so on. And that story is very
nicely told in David Dvorkin's book, by the way,
the 1992 book. Which is entitled? I've forgotten.
It's something about the German vengeance weapon
or something of the kind. It's an excellent book
and a very nice little piece, well referenced
about Kuiper's involvement with Alsace. In any
case, Kuiper's academic colleague, Robert
Cashman, in the United States, was the American
developer of of the lead sulfide detectors. And
Cashman worked with Kuiper or vice versa to
produce one of these things after they were
declassified, just following the war, to produce
one of these things for use in an astronomical
spectrometer at the McDonald Observatory. What
Kuiper learned about German detector
development, I don't know in detail, but I think he
found that they were close on the heels or perhaps
even a little bit better at these near-infrared
detectors than the Americans were. The details of
that I'm not certain about. But the upshot of it in
terms of his ability to have a detector and begin
this pioneering work in near-infrared
spectroscopy, both in stellar and planetary
work, came from his association with Cashman. And
Cashman's A brief obituary of Cashman appeared
not long ago in Physics Today, where there's a
brief assessment of his work on these
near-infrared detectors. The association with
Cashman, as I say, produced a detector, one of
which, by the way, is now in the collection at the
National Air and Space Museum. I managed to
salvage this from Kuiper's collection of
memorabilia, and it was donated to the museum a
couple of years ago. So they have it, one of the very
ones that was used in the original spectrometer
that Kuiper used. Now, Kuiper was, and I know this
because I funded him when I was at headquarters,
was the guy that first realized what a great site
Mauna Kea was. But he got frozen out of it. What do
you know about that? The story of Kuiper's
association with Mauna Kea is rather accurately
told in the two lengthy editorials by Mitch
Waldrop in Science, and these appeared roughly 10
years ago. I can't remember exactly. It's a
complex story. Some of the details, I think, are
forever obscure because they relate to Kuiper's
feelings about it. Essentially, Kuiper
recognized the potential of Mauna Kea, dealt
directly with the governor of the state of Hawaii,
John Burns, who received him very well and who
supported the initial site surveys at Mauna Kea.
At the same time, however, the University of
Hawaii was trying to build a program in astronomy,
primarily in solar astronomy, as a follow-on to
the International Geophysical Year, which had
taken place in 1957-58. There was work on aurora
and, again, on the sun done on Haleakala, And this
work was done through the University of Hawaii.
Well, they hired a solar astronomer, John T.
Jeffries, who brought with him an entourage of
solar physicists from Boulder, Colorado. And
they began this program of solar work. Well, they
decided, while Kuiper was busily working with the
governor of Hawaii to assess the qualities of
Mauna Kea for nighttime astronomy, NASA
solicited proposals for a major optical
telescope on Mauna Kea. Kuiper, with the
assistance of Harold Johnson, also in Tucson,
naturally put in a proposal to do this. But NASA
didn't want a single proposal because it was
clearly non-competitive. So they solicited
proposals from other agencies or other
universities and were given proposals by Harvard
University and also by the University of Hawaii.
John Jeffries, sort of on last minute, put
together this proposal to go in in parallel with
Kuiper's proposal to NASA for a telescope there.
After these proposals were evaluated, the choice
was made to go with the University of Hawaii. And
William Brunk tells me, who was in the driver's
seat at that time, that they at NASA headquarters
felt that Kuiper was overextended. He had too many
irons in the fire at various places around the
world, and they felt that John Jeffries and his
solar crew, while more or less unproven for
nighttime astronomy, should be given the
opportunity to do it. They were on the site, they
were there, and should be given the opportunity,
Kuiper being overextended. The Harvard
proposal, apparently, was not very competitive.
That was Menzel's. That's right. I'll tell you,
since I'm writing a book, I can say anything I want.
Brunk was new. He never did have any track record as
a scientist. Nancy Roman told me personally
before I left headquarters that Kuiper would have
a telescope on Mauna Kea over her dead body.
Nancy Roman's involvement is an element that I
really don't know anything about. Let me ask you
something on a related matter. Kuiper left the
directorship of Yerkes and McDonald rather
suddenly. And in fact,
Frank Edmondson keeps telling me, although I've
never seen any proof, that he says he's got
documentary proof that Kuiper was summarily
fired as director of Yerkes and McDonald. What do
you know about that? I would have to refer to my
notes on that. I've been in touch with Frank
Edmondson about this and with various other
people as well. As I was putting together the
manuscript for my biographical memoir on Kuiper
that will soon be published by the National
Academy, I was fully convinced that this
assertion is true and that Kuiper was forced to
step down. And I would have to refer to my notes and
sources to recall the exact circumstances. on
that, and I have agreed already to provide that to
you, Ron, so that you can consider that. You're on
the record now. Sure. Fair enough. Let me ask you a
personal question. Because G.P.K. obviously is a
key player in the rebirth of planetary astronomy,
and I can't interview him. What was he like? Kuiper
was a very intense personality, a very imposing
figure physically, and an absolutely
domineering character intellectually. He had a
profound effect on my life, certainly at the
professional level, but as the years go by, I see he
had a profound effect on my life in a personal
sense, too. There are other people upon whose
lives he has had similar profound influences, and
Tom Geralds is one such. Tom Geralds and I have,
over the last many years, talked a lot, written a
lot to one another, trying to come to grips, to
reach peace with this effect that Kuyper has had on
both of our lives. Gerholtz, of course, is a fellow
Dutchman. In any case, and dealt with Kuyper
primarily earlier on, in any event, Kuyper was a
domineering individual whose intellect one
could only respect and One evidence of that is that
even essentially everyone who worked with him
called him Dr. Kuiper. He was Gerard only to a very,
very small inner circle of people who were
essentially his contemporaries. Fred Whipple.
Fred Whipple and Harold Johnson and Frank Lowe and
those folks were able to call him Gerard, which, by
the way, wasn't his real name. That's an
Americanized version of Garrett. which was his
Dutch given name. In any case, he, on the one hand,
was a marvelous conversationalist, had a very
nice sense of humor, and was a joy to be around in
many respects. He was extremely impatient, on the
other hand, with anybody who appeared to be
intellectually inferior to him. to have less
knowledge than him and so on, he didn't deal with
students very well. He was very difficult to work
with and to work for. His general demeanor was one
of extreme arrogance, and it took a lot to get past
that, to be able to work with him, to be able to stand
him. But once you did, there was a lot to be derived
from the association, a lot of positive things to
be derived from the association. And for those of
us who were able to get on top of that demeanor
issue, we derived a lot of benefit from the
association. Joe Chamberlain said something
about the Quake. He said he was a very loyal man. And
I mentioned that to Fred Whipple. And he agreed. He
said, yes, he certainly was perhaps too loyal in
some cases. But he said Gerard's main problem was
he couldn't get along with people. That's right.
That's quite right. And I think that that showed up
when Kuiper arrived in America around 1929 or 1930
and went to the Lick Observatory as a postdoc,
later to become a Kellogg Fellow at the Lick
Observatory. I mentioned earlier Philip Riggs,
who was the astronomer in Des Moines where I grew
up. Philip Riggs was a graduate student at Lick
Observatory when Kuyper arrived as a fresh
postdoc from Holland. When I told, after I spent
the first summer at Yerkes Observatory, these now
in 1958, and went back to Des Moines and talked to
Philip Riggs, who had recommended me for the job,
the first thing he asked me was, has old Gerard
Kuyper learned to get along with anybody yet? And
that told me right then and there that this problem
had arisen And this element of Kuiper's
personality showed up from day one. By the way,
Phil Riggs spent a summer at the University of
Illinois. I was his teaching assistant. Oh, is
that right? That's great. He's a wonderful man.
Now, let me connect Kuiper with going back now to
the history of planetary astronomy.
When you started, did you feel inferior to real
astronomers who worked on stars and galaxies?
Well, in a way, yes, and in a way, no. As I've already
mentioned, I got my first acquaintance with real
professional astronomers at Yerkes
Observatory. And this was an extraordinary
opportunity for a boy from the cornfields of Iowa
to go to this imposing architectural structure in
the farmland of Wisconsin, a place from the last
century with gargoyles and all that sort of thing.
It was neogothic right there in the middle of
Wisconsin. The first foreigners I ever talked to,
the first people with advanced degrees,
essentially, that I ever spoke with were there at
Yerkes. So this summer of 1958 was an
extraordinary experience. Well, I say that to
answer your question that Naturally, Yerkes
Observatory was populated and dominated by
classical stellar astronomers, the likes of
Morgan, Hiltner, Abt, Chandrasekhar. S.
Chandrasekhar. S. Chandrasekhar, and on and on.
And Kuiper and his entourage of flunkies,
essentially, some transports or transplants
from England, amateur astronomers from England,
and here this kid down in the darkroom rubbing
prints with the great man himself. So Kuiper was an
anomaly. His program was an anomaly. And all of us
who were part of it were made to feel anomalous. We
were, sure, treated well. I was given opportunity
to spend evenings playing with a 40-inch
telescope and so on. Yet there was this element of
the whole thing was an amateur astronomy project.
Do you think the fact that Kuiper was able to get big
bucks out of the Air Force rankled with some of the?
Oh, I think it must have, sure. The thing that I have
to keep reminding myself is that when I got
acquainted with Kuiper in that summer of 1958, the
man had already done an entire career's worth of
classical stellar astronomy, double star work,
white dwarf work, and stellar spectroscopy, and
done excellent work, the bolometric corrections
and so on, some of which is still very valuable
work. He had begun to pursue solar system work as
essentially an outgrowth of his interest in
binary stars and their formation and so on. But the
man already had this strong scientific
reputation before he even began to pursue
planetary things. And as I've pointed out in my
biographical memoir, his discovery of the
atmosphere of Titan was purely an accident. He ran
out of white dwarfs to take spectra of during the
night at McDonald's And he decided to look at a few
planetary objects, discovered methane on Titan,
and that was a sort of beginning of his
observational work in planetary astronomy.
Well, anyway, that was an accident. But he was the
director of Yerkes, the director of this bunch of
stellar classical astrophysics prima donnas,
who by this time had, I think, grown to loathe him.
Yet they had to deal with him because he was the
director, and he also commanded this very large
amount of funding. from an unexpected source. It
was from a government source, and astronomers
weren't used to that in those days, and they had no
choice but to deal with him, this person with a
richness of resources. So I think there was a
resentment there that grew out of the jealousy
over the funding. It grew out of the the difficulty
of his personality. When Otto Struve was the
director, Otto was able to keep these prima donnas
pretty much in harmony, just because of the
strength of his own personality and his own
managerial skills. But when Struve was gone, the
place began to unravel. And it unraveled along a
variety of lines that were related to these strong
personalities, the diversity of scientific
interests, and no doubt the jealousy over
research funds. In your personal opinion, back
around 1958, 59, 60, do you think that planetary
astronomy was considered second rate and
inferior by the, quote, establishment? Oh, it's
clear to me that it was, yes. As I say, my first
connections with the establishment were at this
rather peculiar place, Yerkes Observatory. But
as I expanded my experiences and contacts to
various other places in the country and other
institutions, it became clearer and clearer that
planetary science, planetary astronomy, as it
was considered in those days, that's really all
there was, was definitely regarded as inferior.
And I've spent the last 30 years in some ways trying
to understand how that came to be. And is there any
way to, is there any antidote for it? Or are we
always going to be plagued with this problem as
long as planetary science is identified as such?
That brings up the next question. How do you think
real, quote unquote, astronomers think of
planetary astronomy now? Now.
I believe that the generation represented by
Kuiper, and this includes such people as Jeff
Burbage, who was a personal enemy of Kuiper, and
various other people of that generation still
have rather negative feelings about it. Let's say
the people at what's now Mount Palomar
Observatory, these folks are cosmologists
primarily. and classical astronomers. And I'm
sure they have a very dim view of the value of
planetary science. The Mount Wilson syndrome.
Yeah, right. But even in Hawaii, where we had a
rather unusual situation. As I say, the program
was just getting started in 1970. That is, the
nighttime astronomy program was just getting
started. And planetary people were already
involved. Bill Sinton was there, David Morrison,
Bob Murphy, and then I showed up in 1970. And
because I know I wrote the funding memo, that funds
were given to Hawaii, committed for a long time,
that they must do planetary work. That's right.
They must do planetary work.
And that was all fine. I mean, that's why the
telescope was built, but it was clear that it would
be used for A large fraction of the time would be for
planetary work and the remainder for classical
astronomy. The point I'd like to make is that that
program developed and grew with a complete
intertwining of classical astronomers, stellar
astronomers, and planetary people. And the
outcome of that was very positive in that there was
a mutual respect, a family atmosphere and
attitude, such that we all took a lot of pleasure in
each other's successes and discoveries. And
people interested in galaxies, such as Alan
Stockton, people interested in classical
stellar spectroscopy, such as Sidney Wolfe and
Walter Bonsack, were working side by side with
those people I've already mentioned doing
planetary work. And as we grew up together, all of
us having gone there, except Bill Sinton as fairly
young people, we developed camaraderie and a
family mood, which was very productive and very
supportive. Before I left Hawaii, that had begun
to change because John Jeffries had left, Don Hall
had become the director, and his hiring policies
had put into faculty positions there a larger
number of cosmologists and people interested in
extragalactic studies. And so the attitude
toward planetary science, I think, even in
Hawaii, had begun to shift a bit, to become a little
less tolerant, a little less interested, and
maybe a little less respectful. However, while I
was still there, planetary astronomy had, still
an important role at the Institute, primarily
because of the funding structure. Also, we had,
you know, productive scientists, but there was
still sort of a cudgel that we held in that the
88-inch telescope was still supported primarily
by a grant from NASA Planetary Programs, and in the
form of a large single grant that exceeded a
quarter of a million dollars for a combination of
support of the telescope, and the support of the
planetary research, all of which was under the
single umbrella of one grant. And that structure
broke down essentially as I left by mutual
agreement with headquarters and the Institute
for Astronomy. But at least during the years I was
there, planetary astronomy was respected. It was
well supported. And we had a wonderful supportive
arrangement with the classical stellar
astronomers. I think that is less so now. That was
one case where people actually talked to each
other. That's right, and in friendly terms. One
last thing about Kuiper. Do you think the fact that
he was in what was considered a second rate field
reinforced his personality character, his
negative personality characters, and gave him
this embattled status? I'm not so sure. I think
Kriper was a difficult personality to the core,
and that he had an element of arrogance and
self-assurance that allowed him to rise above or
beyond the criticisms of his colleagues and
pursue his own path with complete
self-assurance. At the time, he had a good
relationship with S. Chandrasekhar, I think they
also had some difficult times, but they were in
very different areas of science. And I think that,
well, I'm not sure where I was going with that, but
I'll just say again that I think Kuiper didn't have
a siege mentality. He felt completely
self-assured that his course was right. Now we'll
get on to a different subject, and this is
something that I'm Nothing has been written about
this. And the people involved are all dead. So I've
got to ask people's personal opinions who are in
the field now. At the turn of the century,
planetary astronomy was still a popular topic. I
mean, Henry Norris Russell did stuff on Venus and
all that. By 1920, it was not only not popular, it
wasn't safe to be in what killed planetary
astronomy. I think two people killed it. I think
Percival Lowell killed it in the United States,
and Camille Flammarion killed it in Europe.
That's exactly Gerard de Vaucouleur's comment.
Well, I haven't talked to de Vaucouleur about
this, but I... It's right in this book. Good,
great. I came to this awareness when I was
researching some work by Barnard, Edward Emerson
Barnard, on his life and times. Barnard was a voice
of reason during the Canals on Mars era. He was a
Chautauqua series lecturer with lantern slides
of pictures that he had taken, being one of the
great pioneers of photography and astronomy and
discoverer of comets and whatnot, and the fifth
satellite of Jupiter. He was a well-known
personality, but he didn't write popular books
and didn't have the same charisma, contacts, and
persona that Percival Lowell did. Percival
Lowell wrote numerous books on the habitability
of Mars and the nature of Mars' intelligent
civilization and all this and that, based in large
part upon his observations and those of his
colleagues under his thumb at Lowell Observatory
of the canals and seasonal changes on Mars. This
attracted a lot of attention in the popular press
and lent an aura of of silliness to planetary
studies as seen by classical astronomers. What
you indicated was true, that a major part of the
program of nearly all professional astronomical
observatories in the latter part of the 19th
century was planetary work. They were doing
planetary visual observations, searches for
satellites, spectroscopy and photography, what
have you. And this was a very legitimate part of
classical astronomy at the end of the 19th
century. Well, this business about the canals on
Mars, I think, gave that an aura of science fiction
and that primarily the efforts and the charisma of
Percival Lowell in this country did it. I believe,
although I'm not as well acquainted with it, that
parallel activity in Europe by Flammarion with,
again, a volley of popular books and articles
produced essentially the same effect there.
What's the best piece of work you've done in
astronomy? The best piece of work I've done is
probably the work on the spectrum of Neptune's
satellite, Triton, in which persistence in
Studying the near-infrared spectrum produced
the detection and identification of methane,
frozen methane on Triton, and frozen nitrogen,
which we now recognize as the dominant material on
the surface of Triton and Pluto. I continue to
pursue this as the technology permits us to do a
better and better job. Now, in 1989, of course,
Voyager flew by Triton and found some very
interesting things and corroborated the
presence of nitrogen and methane, but it didn't
show anything else. And in the meantime, we've
found from additional ground-based work, carbon
dioxide and carbon monoxide ices on Triton, and
evidence of some other very interesting
hydrocarbons, which we haven't even yet
announced. So it turns out that the persistence in
trying to detect, measure, and interpret the
spectrum of a little object, 30 astronomical
units from the sun, something that has a
temperature in the neighborhood of less than 40
Kelvin and is to the telescope only almost 14th
magnitude, has proven to be a very, very rich
spectrum, which we continue to interpret and find
extremely interesting chemistry and
information on the early development of the solar
system. What did you have the most fun doing so far?
Well, certainly the work on nitrogen has been some
of the most fun. I also had an enormous amount of fun
with our 20-micron detections of faint objects in
the solar system. And I remember very well
standing on the Cassegrain platform in the cold at
the 88-inch telescope in Hawaii in the mid-'70s,
measuring the thermal radiation from Trojan
asteroids at 20 microns. These are objects which
had never been detected thermally before. And I
was able to get the first measurements of heat from
those dark, small, little objects. And by the way,
the detection of heat itself indicated that they
were dark objects which absorbed a lot of sunlight
and had low albedos. Similarly, with two of the
outer satellites of Jupiter, I knew what I was
looking for. I knew that if I could detect them at
all, that that meant they were little black
objects. And standing there on the platform
seeing the strip chart recorder make a positive
detection was a tremendous thrill. Have you had
any fiascos or dead ends? Oh, sure. I've had some
mistakes. What's your greatest fiasco? Well, I'd
preface this by saying that I've enjoyed being on
what is a cutting edge. of detections and
measurements in planetary astronomy. And when
you're on an edge, you can fall sometimes on one
side and fall sometimes on the other. I've already
told you about the successes in which I fell on the
right side of the edge. There have been a couple of
failures where I've fallen on the other side.
Probably the worst one was the apparent detection
of helium emission in the spectrum of Io,
Jupiter's satellite Io. We in Hawaii, one of the
first things I did there was to work on a
near-infrared Fourier transform spectrometer.
And one of the first things we looked at with this
spectrometer after we finally got it online with
the 88-inch telescope was IO, by which time sodium
emission had already been detected in the
spectrum by Robert Brown and colleagues. But we
looked at it, and we detected this. We, that is with
Carl Pilcher and Bill Sinton, we detected helium
emission, the 10-8-30 band or line of helium. We
rushed to a meeting that was held in Ithaca and
reported this and sent out an IAU circular on it.
And Don Hunton congratulated us on the detection
of helium emission. No one understood what it
meant, but they were all willing to believe that
this very peculiar object had helium emission.
And we all set out to understand it. And then we
discovered that this was spurious because the
interferometer control system used a helium
lamp. to provide the clocking frequency. And
while we could not imagine how this Spiria signal
got into the signal chain, indeed it did. And our
detection of helium on Io was wrong. And Larry
Trafton continues to remind me of that, even
though the rest of the world until this very moment
has forgotten, mercifully forgotten. If you read
any of the popular books about exploration of the
solar system that have been coming out in the last
20 years. It's all done by the space probes. Of
course. What's your opinion? My opinion is that
the space probes wouldn't have even known where to
go or what to look at or how to look at it if it hadn't
been for the work that has been done on the ground.
And certainly the incremental improvement in our
understanding of the planets was enormously
augmented by the space probes. space probes. But
I'd remind you again just what I said. When Voyager
got to Triton, it detected nitrogen and methane,
but it sure didn't see the carbon monoxide or the
carbon dioxide.